Network Topology (#43)
bloxapp/SIPs: sips/network_topics_minhash.md

	
	FOR each operator_id IN committee:
		# 1. Serialize the uint64 Operator ID to 8 bytes (Little-Endian)
		input_bytes = serialize_uint64_little_endian(operator_id)
		
		# 2. Compute the SHA-256 hash, resulting in 32 bytes
		hash_bytes = SHA256(input_bytes)
		
		# 3. Convert to uint256 (Big-Endian)
		current_int = uint256_from_bytes_big_endian(hash_bytes)
		
		# 4. Get minimum
		IF current_int < min_int:
			min_int = current_int
	
	# 5. Modulo for topic ID
	RETURN min_int MOD NUM_TOPICS
```

## Fork Transition

To safely transition through the fork, we define the transition policy below. Let:
- $old$: denotes the set of topics the operator should be subscribed to before the fork (according to its committees),
- $new$: denotes the set of topics the operator should subscribe to after the fork.

### Before the Fork

The operator is subscribed to the $old$ topics and publishes to them.

`PRIOR_WINDOW` epochs before the fork, it subscribes to all $new \cup old$.
During this window, for the new topics ($new \setminus old$):
- the operator warms up its mesh for the new topics by setting up GRAFT connections,
- no message is expected until the fork as the topics are brand-new.

> Due to clocks discrepancies we will have special treatment for message validation ignores resulting from `ErrIncorrectTopic`. We will allow during the `PriorWindow` to accept and process messages with topics that match either fork, as long as all other existing checks pass.

Reviewer: Do we actually need to have special message validation cases for the topic check in prior and unsubscription windows, if we can check the message epoch instead of the current epoch?

		hash_bytes = SHA256(input_bytes)
		
		# 3. Convert to uint256 (Big-Endian)
		current_int = uint256_from_bytes_big_endian(hash_bytes)
		
		# 4. Get minimum
		IF current_int < min_int:
			min_int = current_int
	
	# 5. Modulo for topic ID
	RETURN min_int MOD NUM_TOPICS
```

## Topic Names

Currently, prior to this change, topics were named by `ssv.v2.<subnet>` for `<subnet>` from 0 to 127.

On the Boole fork, which introduces this change, the new topics will be named by `/ssv/<ethereum_network_name>/boole/<subnet>`,
where `<subnet>` varies from 0 to 127 as usual, and `<ethereum_network_name>` is the name of the Ethereum network in lower-case, i.e. `mainnet`, `sepolia`, `holesky`, or `hoodi`.
For example, topic 0 for mainnet would be `/ssv/mainnet/boole/0`.

## Fork Transition

To safely transition through the fork, we define the transition policy below. Let:
- $old$: denotes the set of topics the operator should be subscribed to before the fork (according to its committees),
- $new$: denotes the set of topics the operator should subscribe to after the fork.

### Message Validation

Message validation rules will change at the fork. 

> By determining whether a message slot is before, at, or after the activation epoch, the appropriate validation rules can be applied.

Reviewer: It looks very abstract. Perhaps we need to define that a message slot defines the topic we check against, and nothing more. Having a special case for the activation epoch seems redundant

Reviewer 2: After we merge the SIPs to `boole` I can assign them numbers and then instead of writing something abstract, reference #61. But is it crucial? If you'd like this I will do it.

>Perhaps we can just define that a message slot defines the topic we check against, and nothing more.
I thought I was doing it but I guess it isn't clear. Is the following phrasing better?

```suggestion
Let `MVA` be the set of message validation rules that exists pre-fork. Let `MVB` be the set of new rules post-fork.
If the ethereum slot associated with the message is before the fork's activation apply `MVA`. Else, apply `MVB`.
For consensus messages the slot is specified with the `Height` field. For partial signature messages there is a `Slot` field.
```

> In this SIP, the handling of `ErrIncorrectTopic` should be updated to reflect the new topic naming scheme.

Reviewer: > as long as honest nodes broadcast messages to the correct topics

Why? They have only one option: send to the correct topic according to the message slot. Any incorrect topics will be rejected

### Before the Fork

The operator is subscribed to the $old$ topics and publishes to them.

`PRIOR_WINDOW` epochs before the fork, it subscribes to all $new \cup old$.
During this window, for the new topics ($new \setminus old$):
- the operator warms up its mesh for the new topics by setting up GRAFT connections,
- no message is expected until the fork as the topics are brand-new.
We set `PRIOR_WINDOW = 1` epochs to allow
enough time for the operator to set up the new topics before the fork,
and avoid a long overloading period (due to the extra messages being processed in the new topic).

### At and After the Fork

At the fork epoch, the operator unsubscribes from the old topics
(more precisely, $old \setminus new$) after `SUBSEQUENT_WINDOW`.
It keeps its subscription to the $new$ topics and only publishes to them.

We set `SUBSEQUENT_WINDOW` to be a single ethereum slot. This should be more than enough to allow latent nodes to send messages to complete their duties.

> > [!NOTE]

Reviewer 2: I don't understand... this is after the fork.

I think when Matheus wrote "preparation window" he meant "PRIOR_WINDOW"
So I can adjust this.

We set `PRIOR_WINDOW = 1` epochs to allow
enough time for the operator to set up the new topics before the fork,
and avoid a long overloading period (due to the extra messages being processed in the new topic).

### At and After the Fork

At the fork epoch, the operator immediately unsubscribes from the old topics
(more precisely, $old \setminus new$).
It keeps its subscription to the $new$ topics and only publishes to them.

During the unsubscription period, any message in the unsubscribed topics may be **accepted** if it passes message validation.

> [!NOTE]
> Note that this behaviour oversees the last messages sent before the fork that weren't yet delivered,
and could be useful to finish a duty.
> While the more robust approach would be to keep listening on those topics for an extra tiny window,
> this adds extra complexity, extends the performance degradation (as more redundant messages are processed),
> and possibly incurs a negligible gain as duties lasting more than 4 seconds are also less likely to be included either way

> > (remember that the last initiated duties will be aggregator and sync committee duties that start 4 seconds before the fork).

Reviewer 2: @iurii-ssv and @diegomrsantos 
```suggestion
At the fork epoch, the operator unsubscribes from the old topics
(more precisely, $old \setminus new$) after `SUBSEQUENT_WINDOW`.
It keeps its subscription to the $new$ topics and only publishes to them.

We set `SUBSEQUENT_WINDOW` to be a single ethereum slot. This should be more than enough to allow latent nodes to send messages to complete their duties.
```

	
	FOR each operator_id IN committee:
		# 1. Serialize the uint64 Operator ID to 8 bytes (Little-Endian)
		input_bytes = serialize_uint64_little_endian(operator_id)
		
		# 2. Compute the SHA-256 hash, resulting in 32 bytes
		hash_bytes = SHA256(input_bytes)
		
		# 3. Convert to uint256 (Big-Endian)
		current_int = uint256_from_bytes_big_endian(hash_bytes)
		
		# 4. Get minimum
		IF current_int < min_int:
			min_int = current_int
	
	# 5. Modulo for topic ID
	RETURN min_int MOD NUM_TOPICS
```

## Fork Transition

To safely transition through the fork, we define the transition policy below. Let:
- $old$: denotes the set of topics the operator should be subscribed to before the fork (according to its committees),
- $new$: denotes the set of topics the operator should subscribe to after the fork.

### Before the Fork

The operator is subscribed to the $old$ topics and publishes to them.

`PRIOR_WINDOW` epochs before the fork, it subscribes to all $new \cup old$.
During this window, for the new topics ($new \setminus old$):
- the operator warms up its mesh for the new topics by setting up GRAFT connections,
- no message is expected until the fork as the topics are brand-new.

> Still, due to clocks discrepancies, any incoming non-rejectable message (according to the new fork message validation rules) can be accepted and propagated, while rejectable ones can be ignored to avoid score degradation.

Reviewer 2: you have a point...
We will see if @MatheusFranco99, the OG of the SIP, is available to comment
If not I will do some changes

> Still, due to clocks discrepancies, any incoming non-rejectable message (according to the new fork message validation rules) can be accepted and propagated, while rejectable ones can be ignored to avoid score degradation.

Reviewer 3: I mean a message received in the new boole topic sent by a node that forked before us - we consider it in the wrong topic.

> Still, due to clocks discrepancies, any incoming non-rejectable message (according to the new fork message validation rules) can be accepted and propagated, while rejectable ones can be ignored to avoid score degradation.

Reviewer 4: > For malformed, duplicates, or whatever rejection case, I think it's fine to simply ignore them.
> Ofc the most strict would be to do the rejections. But, since it's a small time-window and we were fine against ignores, I think it's better to avoid a risky score degradation. What do you guys think?

@MatheusFranco99 I'm not against ignoring, given the small time-window it probably doesn't matter, 

I'm just trying to understand why we need to "convert rejects into ignores" in the first place ... if we only change the transport (the topic a message is delivered on, and I assume we don't ever send the same message to old and new topics **both at the same time**) why does the validation logic need to be adjusted ?

> Still, due to clocks discrepancies, any incoming non-rejectable message (according to the new fork message validation rules) can be accepted and propagated, while rejectable ones can be ignored to avoid score degradation.

Reviewer 2: I think this change isn't a problem, since new topic messages will simply be mapped to the new msg validation rules. Do you guys foresee a problem with this in implementation?

I was also thinking about a grace period to unsubscribe from old topics.
There may be issues with stalling duties that this can help with

> Still, due to clocks discrepancies, any incoming non-rejectable message (according to the new fork message validation rules) can be accepted and propagated, while rejectable ones can be ignored to avoid score degradation.

Reviewer 2: I think changing to ignore will cause unnecessary code to be written.
We can see on devnet if we have those issues and then think about bringing back ignores

> Still, due to clocks discrepancies, any incoming non-rejectable message (according to the new fork message validation rules) can be accepted and propagated, while rejectable ones can be ignored to avoid score degradation.

Reviewer 2: Rereading the reasoning not to add a grace period, I am taking what I just wrote back

> this adds extra complexity, extends the performance degradation (as more redundant messages are processed),
> and possibly incurs a negligible gain as duties lasting more than 4 seconds are also less likely to be included either way

> Still, due to clocks discrepancies, any incoming non-rejectable message (according to the new fork message validation rules) can be accepted and propagated, while rejectable ones can be ignored to avoid score degradation.

Reviewer 4: > I think the only non-malicious case we need to handle is early-forked nodes publishing on the new topics. Those messages will fail validation on nodes that haven’t forked yet. During the preparation phase, we should still accept them for gossip and propagate them so the new topics keep working properly.

that ^ would be one way to do it,

but wouldn't the following be the most straightforward way to handle the **old**->**new** topic transition (maybe it was mentioned somewhere and I missed it) ?
- subscribe to the **new** topic at `ForkEpoch - PRIOR_WINDOW`
- expect messages to arrive either on **old** or **new** topic (doesn't matter which one as long as the sender doesn't send the messages to both topics ... and if he does - the existing validation rules will take care of it by rejecting the duplicate) until epoch `ForkEpoch + 1`
- after `ForkEpoch + 1` we unsubscribe from the **old** topic (dropping any messages that keep arriving there, if any) and just keep listening for messages from the **new** topic

@MatheusFranco99 @diegomrsantos @GalRogozinski @nkryuchkov

> Still, due to clocks discrepancies, any incoming non-rejectable message (according to the new fork message validation rules) can be accepted and propagated, while rejectable ones can be ignored to avoid score degradation.

Reviewer 2: The validation rules changed a bit in #61. See https://github.com/ssvlabs/knowledge-base/pull/2.
So it won't be the exact same validation rules.

I thought "accept" was clear but I will make it more explicit

> Still, due to clocks discrepancies, any incoming non-rejectable message (according to the new fork message validation rules) can be accepted and propagated, while rejectable ones can be ignored to avoid score degradation.

Reviewer 4: Regarding the grace period for "late arrivals on the old topic", I don't have a strong opinion (I think it's fine either way), it's just that SIP says **may** ... and I'd rather it was more strict about it (instead of leaving this up to the implementors):

> During the unsubscription period, any message in the unsubscribed topics may be accepted if it passes message validation.

I would however like that SIP clarify the "early arrivals on the new topic" behavior (as per [my other comment](https://github.com/ssvlabs/SIPs/pull/43#discussion_r2712662418))

> Still, due to clocks discrepancies, any incoming non-rejectable message (according to the new fork message validation rules) can be accepted and propagated, while rejectable ones can be ignored to avoid score degradation.

Reviewer 2: btw, if you guys think that some things in the SIP are still not clear don't be shy to point them out or add suggestion straight on github

We set `PRIOR_WINDOW = 1` epochs to allow
enough time for the operator to set up the new topics before the fork,
and avoid a long overloading period (due to the extra messages being processed in the new topic).

### At and After the Fork

At the fork epoch, the operator immediately unsubscribes from the old topics
(more precisely, $old \setminus new$).
It keeps its subscription to the $new$ topics and only publishes to them.

> During the unsubscription period, any message in the unsubscribed topics is **accepted**.

Reviewer: But actually thinking more about it, I think your suggestion is fine

> [!NOTE]

> > Note that this behaviour oversees the right last messages sent before the fork that weren't yet delivered,

Reviewer 4: Could you clarify what the `the right last messages` refers to ? The "right" here is a bit confusing

Reviewer 2: probably we can delete this word
